E U R O P E A N C O N S T I T U T I O N . E U

E U R O P
E A N C O
N S T I T
U T I O N

D I S C OV E R  

T H E  

F U T U R E   O F  

E U RO P E

2 02 0

The Honorable...a European
Constitution

The past decades have seen tremendous changes around the world, 
with rising public and private actors, new and more global threats, 
and ever more interconnectedness. Yet, European Union institutions 
have remained largely the same. 

In  order  to  face  this  new  world  and  its  challenges,  we  need  a 
new  Union,  rooted  in  profoundly  reformed,  stronger  and  more 
democratic institutions. We need a European Constitution. 

This is the full text of our proposal for a Constitution: one preamble, 
six  articles,  and  around  twelve  pages  of  full  text.  No  more.  This 
constitution draws from a number of robust constitutions and adds 
specific,  innovative  provisions  designed  to  ensure  a  democratic, 
transparent and efficient system of government. So that we may 
finally create a Europe working for all its citizens.

Louis Drounau,  

President of EuropeanConstitution.eu

Preamble

We the People of the European Union, united in our diversity, common history, and shared 
values  and  future,  in  order  to  form  an  ever-closer  Union,  ensure  the  fundamental  rights  of 
all, promote solidarity, development and the general welfare, and secure a free, peaceful and 
sustainable future for generations to come, establish and adopt this Constitution for the Eu-
ropean Union.

............4
Article I: Fundamental rights, freedoms, and responsibilities ............4
Article I: Fundamental rights, freedoms, and responsibilities 

....................................................7
Article II: The legislative branch ....................................................7
Article II: The legislative branch 

.................................................17
Article III: The executive branch .................................................17
Article III: The executive branch 

..............................................................20
Article IV: The judiciary ..............................................................20
Article IV: The judiciary 

.........23
Article V: General provisions for citizens, officials, and States .........23
Article V: General provisions for citizens, officials, and States 

The full text is in the right-hand side column. 
The  left-hand  side  column  indicates  the 
location of specific provisions.

.................................27
Article VI: Final provisions .........................................................27
Article VI: Final provisions ........................

4   EuropeanConstitution.eu – Fundamental rights, freedoms, and responsibilities

Fundamental rights, freedoms, and responsibilities – EuropeanConstitution.eu   5

Article I
Fundamental rights, freedoms, and responsibilities

(1)  Respect and promotion of 

human rights 

(2)  Fundamental rights and 

freedoms 

(3)  Right to vote 

(4)  Absence of discrimination 

Section 1 – Fundamental rights and freedoms

Inviolable  and  inalienable  human  rights  form  the  basis  of 
every  human  community;  respecting,  protecting,  ensuring, 
and actively promoting them shall be the duty of all federal 
authorities. Every individual shall have the freedom to exer-
cise and enjoy his rights and freedoms, provided he does not 
violate the rights and freedoms of others or upset the consti-
tutional order.

The European Union recognises the following rights and free-
doms to all, citizens or not: the right to life and physical in-
tegrity; the right to equality for all before the law; the right to 
equality of opportunity; freedom of conscience, opinion and 
belief; freedom of expression; freedom of peaceful assembly; 
freedom of association and to form political parties and un-
ions; right to privacy of all means of communication, person-
al data and information; freedom of movement; freedom of 
occupation; right to education; right to private property and 
protection of said property against unreasonable searches and 
seizures; right of asylum; and right to petition federal author-
ities and expect a response, as prescribed by law. Citizens are 
also recognised the right to political representation, the right 
to an adequate standard of living, and the full enjoyment of 
public goods as prescribed by law.

The right to vote, in particular, is a cornerstone of democracy; 
Congress shall ensure that voting is free, fair, transparent, and 
easy and accessible to all, at all levels of the Union.

These rights shall be enjoyed by all with the clear absence of 
discrimination on any account – including, but not limited to, 
disability, employment, nationality, race or ethnicity, political 
and religious beliefs or lack thereof, gender, sex, and sexual 
orientation.

(6)  Limitation to curtailing rights 

by law 

(7)  Right to resist 

(8)  Limits to rights and freedoms 

(9)  Compulsory education 

(10)  Duty to vote 

the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the Internation-
al  Covenant  on  Economic,  Social  and  Cultural  Rights. The 
enumeration  of  the  above  rights  and  freedoms  shall  not  be 
construed to deny other rights and freedoms retained by the 
people.

Accordingly, no right or freedom shall be interfered with, un-
less pursuant to a law aimed at upholding the public safety 
and the rights of the community, with fair consideration given 
to the necessity of security and the imperative of liberty. Any 
law interfering with a fundamental right or freedom shall ap-
ply generally and specify said affected right or freedom; in no 
case may the essence of a fundamental right or freedom be 
affected.

All citizens shall have the right to resist any person seeking 
to abolish the constitutional order, should no other remedy is 
available.

Individuals affected in their rights shall have access to redress 
through  the  courts,  with  fair,  efficient  and  timely  access  to 
justice for all.

Section 2 – Responsibilities

The exercise and enjoyment of the above rights and freedoms 
incur responsibilities for citizens towards the community.

All individuals shall respect the rights and freedoms of others, 
as well as the constitutional order. Abuse of these rights and 
freedoms, as defined by law and judicial decisions, shall lead 
to the temporary withholdings of some or all of the abuser’s 
rights and freedoms.

Education is a pillar of an informed citizenry. It shall there-
fore be compulsory and made affordable to all, according to 
their resources.

As a central way to contribute to public life, voting is a duty 
as well as a right for all citizens of legal voting age and legally 
allowed to vote. Voting in federal and State elections shall be 
compulsory  for  all  eligible  citizens,  under  penalty  of  a  fair 
and deterring fine to be ascertained by law.

(5)  International instruments 

The European Union also recognises human rights as defined 
in international instruments – including, but not limited to, 

(11)  Duty to pay taxes 

Taxes  are  essential  to  the  good  functioning  of  public  insti-
tutions,  to  promote  development,  and  to  ensure  the  gener-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6   EuropeanConstitution.eu – Fundamental rights, freedoms, and responsibilities

The legislative branch – EuropeanConstitution.eu   7

(12)  Mandate to fight tax evasion 

and avoidance

(13)  “Jealousy Day” provision 

al welfare and the furniture of public goods to all. Relevant 
physical and moral persons have a duty to acquit themselves 
of their taxes, at all levels and in good faith. Congress shall 
ensure, by law, the right level of transparency for taxes paid.

(14)  Community service 

(15)  Duty to protect the 
environment 

(16)  Periodic review of 

environmental standards

(17)  Civic education and 

knowledge of institutions 

Solidarity and mutual support are cardinal values of commu-
nity life. To foster these across the Union, Congress may de-
cide on a compulsory community service. In order to ensure 
the participation of all, this service shall be made flexible and 
compatible with educational and work requirements, and in-
clude financial compensation.

Mindful  of  their  responsibility  towards  future  generations, 
citizens, residents, private actors, and public institutions shall 
protect the environment, at home and abroad, including nat-
ural ecosystems and animals, and ensure high levels of pro-
tection  through  appropriate  legislation.  They  shall  act  in  a 
sustainable manner, in accordance with norms and standards 
set by law and judicial decisions, which are to be periodically 
reviewed and improved as necessary.

For the benefit of civic education and behaviour, all citizens 
and  residents  shall  get  acquainted  with  their  institutions, 
rights and responsibilities.

Article II
The legislative branch

(18)  Bicameral legislature 

(19)  Age criteria
(20)  Citizenship/residency criteria 

(21)  Term/service limit 

(22)  Direct election, term 

duration, local districts 

(23)  Majority judgment
(24)  State-wide proportionality 
from second vote on party 
lists 

(25)  Census 

Section 1 – Establishment of a bicameral Congress

All  legislative  powers  shall  be  vested  in  a  Congress  of  the 
European Union, which shall consist of two Houses: a Parlia-
ment and a Senate.

Section 2 – Establishment of the Parliament

Any person who shall have attained the age of twenty-five in 
the year of the election, have been for five years a citizen of 
the European Union, and for three months been a resident of 
that constituency in which he seeks to be elected shall be eli-
gible as Member of Parliament. Members of Parliament shall 
not serve more than four full terms or be eligible after a com-
bined ten years, including when filling a vacancy.

Members  of  Parliament  are  elected  directly  by  the  citizens 
of  their  constituency  every  three  years.  There  shall  be  one 
Member of Parliament for each federal electoral constituen-
cy, elected by majority judgment. With a view to ensuring fair 
State-wide party proportionality, there shall be an additional 
number, at least equal to the number of federal electoral con-
stituencies, of Members of Parliament chosen through a sec-
ond vote and drawn from a gender-alternate State-wide lists. 
Parliament  shall  apportion  Members  of  Parliament  among 
the Member States, according to their respective population 
using the Sainte-Laguë method.

A  federal  census  shall  be  completed  within  one  year  of  the 
entry into force of this Constitution in all States where one 
has not been carried out in the preceding three years and ap-
proved by European Union institutions. A Union-wide census 
shall henceforth be completed by federal authorities one full 
year  before  every  other  Congressional  election;  apportion-
ment shall be changed accordingly by Parliament at least six 
full  months  before  the  upcoming  election.  For  its  first  elec-
tion,  the  Parliament  may  retain  the  current  composition  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8   EuropeanConstitution.eu – The legislative branch

The legislative branch – EuropeanConstitution.eu   9

(26)  Single-member federal 
electoral districts 

(27)  Gerrymandering provision 

(28)  Electoral law 

(29)  Thresholds 

(30)  Permanent vacancy 

the existing European Parliament.  

Each State shall have at least one Member of Parliament. Par-
liament shall divide States that are entitled to more than one 
Member  of  Parliament  into  single-member  federal  electoral 
districts  of  roughly  equal  populations;  this  drawing  of  dis-
tricts shall be done in a fair manner, not for political gain, and 
based, whenever possible, on existing State and local admin-
istrative districts. The drawing and redrawing of any district 
shall be done concurrently by both Houses of Congress and 
approved by the Supreme Court.

Congress  shall  detail  the  modalities  of  the  election,  includ-
ing  apportionment,  modalities  and  limitations  of  campaign 
financing, details on the party vote, and measures to promote 
gender balance, in a federal electoral law. Congress shall in 
particular consider the appropriateness of an electoral thresh-
old for party proportionality, which shall not exceed three per 
cent.

When  a  permanent  vacancy  occurs  in  Parliament,  the  next 
available best-faring candidate from that constituency’s most 
recent parliamentary election shall become a temporary Mem-
ber of Parliament until the following parliamentary election. 
Any permanent vacancy occurring in the six months before a 
parliamentary election shall remain unfilled.

(31)  Equal vote in Parliament 

Each  Member  of  Parliament  shall  have  one  vote  in  Parlia-
ment.

(32)  Power of impeachment

Parliament shall have the sole power of impeachment.

(33)  President of Parliament and 

other officers 

Parliament shall choose, by majority judgment, its President 
and other relevant officers, including a President pro tempore, 
in the absence of the President or when he shall exercise the 
Office of President of the European Union. No person consti-
tutionally ineligible to the Office of President of the European 
Union shall be eligible to that of President of the Parliament. 
The President of the Parliament shall serve as President pro 
tempore of the European Union when neither the President of 
the European Union nor the President of the Senate are able 
to serve. In case of vacancy of the Office of President of the 
Parliament,  Parliament  shall  speedily  elect  a  new  President. 
The  President  of  the  Parliament  shall  have  one  vote,  unless 
the Parliament be equally divided, in which case he shall have 
two votes.

(34)  Age criteria
(35)  Citizenship/residency criteria 

(36)  Term/service limit 

(37)  Direct election, term 

duration, State constituency

(38)  Majority judgment
(39)  First session 

(40)  Federal electoral law 

(41)  Permanent vacancy 

Section 3 – Establishment of the Senate

Any person who shall have attained the age of thirty in the 
year  of  the  election,  have  been  for  seven  years  a  citizen  of 
the European Union, and for six months been a resident of 
that State in which he seeks to be elected shall be eligible as 
Senator. Senators shall not serve more than three full terms or 
be  eligible  after  a  combined  fourteen  years,  including  when 
filling a vacancy.

Senators are elected directly by the citizens of their State every 
six years. There shall be two Senators for each Member State, 
elected concurrently by majority judgment. For the first ever 
session of the Senate, Senators shall be randomly divided into 
two groups, with the two Senators of each State in opposite 
groups. The seats of the Senators of the first group shall be 
vacated after three years, and those of the second group after 
six years, so that half of the Senate may be elected every three 
years.

Congress shall detail the modalities of the election, including 
modalities and limitations of campaign financing, in a federal 
electoral law.

When  a  permanent  vacancy  occurs  in  Parliament,  the  next 
available best-faring candidate from that State’s most recent 
Senatorial  election  shall  become  a  temporary  Senator  until 
the following Senatorial election. Any permanent vacancy oc-
curring  in  the  six  months  before  a  Senatorial  election  shall 
remain unfilled.

(42)  Equal vote in the Senate

Each Senator shall have one vote in the Senate.

(43)  Trial of impeachments 

(44)  President of the Senate and 

other officers 

The Senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments. 
When the President or Prime Minister of the European Union 
is tried, the President of the Supreme Court shall preside. A 
conviction  shall  require  a  two-thirds  majority  of  the  Mem-
bers  present.  Judgement  in  cases  of  impeachment  shall  not 
extend further than the removal from Office and disqualifica-
tion to hold and enjoy any Office within the European Union, 
at all levels. The person convicted shall nevertheless be liable 
and subject to indictment, trial, judgement, and punishment, 
according to law.

The Senate shall choose, by majority judgment, its President 
and other relevant officers, including a President pro tempore, 
in the absence of the President or when he shall exercise the 
Office of President of the European Union. No person consti-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10   EuropeanConstitution.eu – The legislative branch

The legislative branch – EuropeanConstitution.eu   11

tutionally ineligible to the Office of President of the European 
Union shall be eligible to that of President of the Senate. The 
President of the Senate shall serve as President pro tempore 
of the European Union when the President is unable to serve. 
In case of vacancy of the Office of President of the Senate, the 
Senate shall speedily elect a new President. The President of 
the Senate shall have one vote, unless the Senate be equally 
divided, in which case he shall have two votes.

Section 4 – Elections of Members of Congress and 
recess

Elections of Members of Congress occurring in the same year 
shall be held concurrently, in May, at a date chosen by Par-
liament. Elections shall therefore take place on the same day 
throughout the Union.

Congress shall detail the modalities of the election in a federal 
electoral law. Local modalities, including voting places, shall 
be prescribed in each State by the legislature thereof. Howev-
er, Congress may at any time, by law, make or alter such regu-
lations in order to ensure that voting is free, fair, transparent, 
and easy and accessible, and that all citizens of the Union are 
equal in their vote.

(45)  Synchronous congressional 

elections 

(46)  Local organisation of 

elections and congressional 
control 

(47)  General interest
(48)  Imperative mandates 

Members of Congress shall work for the general interest of 
the Union and its citizens. There shall be no imperative man-
date.

(49)  Recess 

Congress shall sit continuously, except for periods of recess, 
as is necessary to consult with electors.

(50)  Self-control of Houses 

(51)  Quorum 

(52)  Sanctions 

Section 5 – Internal rules for both Houses of 
Congress

In accordance with this Constitution, each House shall decide 
on  its  rules  of  procedure  and  be  the  judge  of  the  election, 
results, behaviour and qualifications of its own Members. A 
majority of each shall constitute a quorum for all votes, elec-
tions and other decisions. A smaller number shall be author-
ised  to  compel  the  attendance  of  absent  Members,  in  such 
manner and under such penalties as each House may provide. 
Each  House  may  punish  its  Members  for  disorderly  behav-
iour, and, with a two-thirds majority and upon substantiat-
ed grounds, expel a Member. No Member shall be expelled 
based on his opinion alone.

(53)  Compulsory voting 

(54)  Private vote, public results 

(55)  Vote delegation 

(56)  Committees 

(57)  Transparency of proceedings 

and online journal 

(58)  Single seat 

Members  of  Congress  have  the  duty  to  vote.  Each  House 
shall ensure that voting is transparent, easy and accessible to 
all, and determine necessary and deterring penalties and fines 
to enforce the obligation to vote. The voting process shall be 
private, but the result of votes shall be made public in a timely 
manner, including the vote of every Member by name. Mem-
bers  may  delegate  their  voting  right  to  another  Member  of 
their House, for a limited time and under conditions decided 
by each House, but no Member shall receive more than one 
delegation of vote. Blank votes shall be properly recorded.

Each  House  shall  set  up  the  necessary  committees  for  the 
proper  and  efficient  discharge  of  its  responsibilities  and  the 
protection  and  upholding  of  fundamental  rights  and  free-
doms.

Each House shall keep a public journal of its proceedings at 
all times, including the records of the votes of every Members 
by name. The journals shall be made easily accessible to the 
public at large in a timely fashion.

Both Houses will seat in a single location. The choice of this 
location shall be made by Congress with a view to facilitate 
the efficiency of its work.

Neither  House  shall,  without  the  consent  of  the  other,  ad-
journ for more than three working days, nor relocate to any 
other place than that in which the two Houses shall be sitting.

Section 6 – Legal procedure for the adoption of 
laws

(59)  Simple majority 

In order to become law, every bill shall be approved by the 
legislature. 

(60)  Joint committee 

If a bill is adopted by a simple majority by both Houses of 
Congress, it is approved by the legislature. 

If  a  bill,  having  been  considered  twice  by  each  House,  fails 
to be approved by the legislature, both Houses may choose 
to  form  a  dedicated  committee  to  prepare  a  joint  proposal. 
Should this joint proposal be adopted by a simple majority 
by both Houses, it is approved by the legislature. Should the 
Senate fail to approve it, the proposal may be considered ap-
proved by the legislature if Parliament adopts it with a two-
thirds majority.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12   EuropeanConstitution.eu – The legislative branch

The legislative branch – EuropeanConstitution.eu   13

(61)  Presidential signature 

(62)  Tax bills 

(63)  Other legal documents 

(64)  Publicity delay 

Every bill approved by the legislature shall, before it becomes 
a law, be presented to the President of the European Union. If 
he approves, he shall sign it; if not, he shall return it, with his 
objections to that House in which it originated. Said House 
shall  enter  the  objections  on  their  journal,  and  proceed  to 
reconsider the bill for its approval by the legislature. If, after 
such a reconsideration, the approval of the reconsidered bill 
by the legislature and a second refusal by the President to sign 
the bill, three-fifths of each House of Congress agree to pass 
the bill, it shall become a law.

If any bill shall not be returned by the President within ten 
working  days  after  it  shall  have  been  officially  sent  to  him, 
with the exception of cases of force majeure, that bill shall be 
a law, in like manner as if he had signed it.

All bills for raising revenue shall originate in the Parliament, 
but the Senate may propose or concur with amendments as 
on other bills.

Every order, resolution, or any other document requiring the 
approval of both Parliament and the Senate shall be present-
ed to the President of the European Union. Before it shall take 
effect, it shall be approved by him or, being disapproved by 
him,  shall  be  repassed  by  three-fifths  of  the  Parliament  and 
Senate,  according  to  the  rules  and  limitations  prescribed  in 
the case of a bill.

No  vote  on  a  bill,  order,  resolution  or  any  other  document 
shall  be  voted  on  less  than  seventy-two  hours  after  its  full 
and final text shall have been officially made available to the 
House  in  which  the  vote  shall  take  place  and  to  the  gener-
al public, whichever takes place last. Congress may delineate 
clear,  limited  and  exceptional  cases  of  emergency  that  may 
wave this requirement.

Section 7 – Powers of Congress

Congress shall have the power:

(65)  Fundamental rights and 
freedoms, public goods, 
welfare 

•  To protect, ensure, and actively promote all fundamen-
tal rights and freedoms recognised by this Constitution, 
including the full enjoyment of public goods for all and 
through  appropriate  welfare  measures,  and  to  enforce 
all responsibilities outlined;

(66)  Public health, environment, 

•  To  protect,  ensure  and  actively  promote  public  health 

consumer protection 

(67)  Support to political parties

(68)  Taxation power 

(69)  Central Bank 

and environmental protection, consumer protection, and 
citizen participation in public affairs, including through 
political parties;

•  To  directly  and  indirectly  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties, 
and any other relevant revenue for the European Union; 
this shall include the power to lay and collect taxes on 
incomes, from whatever source derived; all federal tax-
es, duties, and other relevant revenue levied shall apply 
uniformly and fairly throughout the Union;

•  To approve the Union’s budget;

•  To pay the debt and borrow money on the credit of the 

European Union;

•  To  issue  money,  regulate  the  value  thereof,  and  adopt 
monetary  policy,  all  through  an  independent  Central 
Bank whose mandate shall include supporting employ-
ment, stabilising prices, and moderating long-term inter-
est rates; the Central Bank shall endeavour to prevent, 
address, and mitigate the effects of financial, monetary, 
economic or similar crises, including by preventing pri-
vate actors from presenting systemic risks;

•  To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among 
the  Member  States,  including  through  uniform  bank-
ruptcy laws;

•  To establish a uniform rule of naturalisation and citizen-

ship;

•  To fix the standards of weights and measures according 

to international conventions;

(70)  Infrastructure spending

•  To plan, fund and establish all necessary infrastructure;

(71)  Federal R&D and patents 

•  To promote the progress of science, humanities and the 
arts, including through public funding and by securing 
and enforcing patents to authors and inventors for limit-
ed periods of time, as may be suited to fairly reward cre-
ativity, encourage further creation, and provide a public 
benefit;

•  To constitute tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court;

(72)  European army, European 

FBI, intelligence agency 

•  To  provide  for  the  common  defence  and  public  safety, 
including  through  armed  forces  and  relevant  federal 
law-enforcement  agencies,  abroad  and  on  the  Union’s 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14   EuropeanConstitution.eu – The legislative branch

(73)  Congressional oversight 

(74)  Arms control and regulations 

(75)  War declaration and conduct 

(76)  Temporary executive action 

(77)  WMD clause 

territory whenever a single State does not have sufficient 
jurisdiction, or in conjunction with said State, or when 
the Constitutional order or the safety of the Union are 
threatened;  Congress  shall  exercise  close  oversight  of 
all  security  and  defence  operations,  in  particular  with 
a view to ensure the compatibility of their actions with 
human rights and humanitarian principles and law; for 
the  purpose  of  a  more  peaceful  society,  Congress  shall 
regulate  and  control  the  production,  sale,  acquisition 
and possession of all relevant arms and weapons;

•  To  declare  war  or  authorise  military  action,  and  make 
rules concerning enemy captures, in accordance with hu-
man rights and humanitarian principles and law; a tem-
porary authorisation of military action may be delegated 
to  the  Government  of  the  European  Union  with  clear 
limits  of  objective,  engagement  and  duration,  which 
shall not go beyond thirty days; this authorisation shall 
only be renewed explicitly and following review of the 
specific situation at hand;

•  To  raise  and  support  a  professional  military,  including 
land  army,  navy,  air  force  or  other,  and  other  relevant 
forces and make rules and regulations for the government 
and behaviour thereof, in accordance with international 
treaties, human rights, and humanitarian principles and 
law;  under  no  circumstances,  including  a  State  of  war 
or emergency, shall any administration of the European 
Union, at any level, use, hold, develop, finance, purchase, 
sell, or facilitate the acquisition or development of weap-
ons of mass destruction – including, but not limited to 
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons;

•  To define and punish piracy and other crimes committed 
in international waters and spaces, and offences against 
international law, in accordance with international law, 
human rights, and humanitarian principles and law;

•  To exercise exclusive legislation, in all cases whatsoever, 
over all territories as may, by cession, purchase or other-
wise – and with the consent of the legislature of the State 
in  which  the  territory  shall  be,  when  applicable  –,  be-
come federal land or be under federal control, including 
for military and other purposes useful to the Union; and

•  To  make  all  laws  which  shall  be  necessary  and  proper 
for the execution of the aforementioned powers, and all 
other powers vested by this Constitution in the Govern-

The legislative branch – EuropeanConstitution.eu   15

ment of the European Union, or in any ministry or of-
ficer thereof.

(78)  Subsidiarity 

Subsidiarity shall be the cardinal value in the distribution of 
competences between the federal, State, and local levels.

(79)  State of emergency 

(80)  Laws abridging rights 

(81)  Right to blasphemy 

(82)  Voting protection 

(83)  Salary of elected officials 

Section 8 – Limits to the power of Congress

Fundamental rights are inalienable and shall not be suspend-
ed, unless in certain cases, such as a state of emergency, and 
for a limited period of time, when the public safety duly re-
quires it.

No law shall be made to establish a religion, or prohibit the 
free exercise or non-exercise thereof, or abridging fundamen-
tal  rights  of  anyone,  citizen  of  the  European  Union  or  not, 
unless in cases of explicit threat to public safety or incitation 
to crimes against or hatred of individuals or groups of indi-
viduals. This shall not be construed as limiting in any way the 
criticism of ideologies.

No law shall be made to limit in any way the enjoyment of 
fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  of  citizens,  including  the 
right  to  vote  for  citizens  eighteen  and  older,  and  other  fun-
damental rights and freedoms on any account, including, but 
not  limited  to,  disability,  employment,  nationality,  race  or 
ethnicity, political and religious beliefs or lack thereof, gender, 
sex, and sexual orientation.

No ex-post facto law shall be passed by Congress.

No tax or duty shall be imposed on goods, services or capital 
for their export to or import from any State.

No preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce 
or revenue to the ports, airports or territory of one State over 
those  of  another;  nor  shall  any  vehicle  bound  to,  or  from, 
one State, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another, 
unless in cases of risk to safety or damage to the environment, 
as prescribed by law.

No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, unless duly au-
thorised by law; all uses of public money shall be recorded 
and made public in a timely and easily-accessible manner.

No law varying the compensation of elected officials for their 
service  shall  take  effect  until  after  the  following  election  of 
their respective seat.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16   EuropeanConstitution.eu – The legislative branch

The executive branch – EuropeanConstitution.eu   17

(84)  Disclosure of gifts 

(85)  Protection of federal 
competencies 

(86)  Free internal trade 

(87)  No State army or militia 

No title of nobility shall be granted or recognised by the Eu-
ropean  Union,  and  no  person  holding  any  public  Office  or 
official position in or related to the Government shall, with-
out the consent of Congress and full public disclosure, accept 
any present, emolument, Office, or title, of any kind whatever, 
from any foreign administration, at all levels, or any private 
entity.

Section 9 – Limits to the power of States

No  State  shall  enter  into  any  treaty,  alliance,  or  confedera-
tion, issue money or bills of credit, make anything a tender 
in payment of debts, limit by law the fundamental rights or 
freedoms of anyone as recognised herein, adopt ex-post facto 
law, or adopt a law impairing the obligation of contracts.

No State shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any tax-
es  or  duties  on  imports  or  exports,  except  as  may  be  abso-
lutely necessary for implementing its inspection laws; the net 
produce of all related taxes and duties laid by any State on 
imports or exports shall be transferred to the Treasury of the 
European Union, and all such laws shall be subject to the re-
vision and control of Congress.

No  State  shall  raise  or  support  a  professional  military  – 
whether land, army, navy, air force or other –, militia or any 
other defence force, nor shall engage in war, unless actually 
invaded, or in such imminent danger as will not admit of de-
lay.

(88)  President of the European 

Union

(89)  Non-renewable term
(90)  Term duration
(91)  Election by majority 

judgment 

(92)  Age criteria
(93)  Citizenship criteria 

(94)  Vacancy 

Article III
The executive branch

Section 1 – Establishment of a President of the 
European Union

The executive power shall be vested in a President of the Euro-
pean Union, as Head of State. The President is directly elected 
by  the  citizens  of  the  European  Union  for  a  non-renewable 
term  of  six  years.  The  President  of  the  European  Union  is 
elected  by  majority  judgment. The  election  of  the  President 
shall be held concurrently with that of Members of Congress 
happening in the same year.

Any  person  who  shall  have  attained  the  age  of  forty  in  the 
year of the election and have been for nine years a citizen of 
the European Union shall be eligible as President. The Presi-
dent of the European Union shall not serve more than one full 
term and no person shall be eligible as President who has held 
the Office of, or acted as, President for more than half a term, 
including when filling a vacancy.

In case of vacancy or inability of the President to discharge 
his powers and duties, his Office shall devolve on the Presi-
dent of the Senate – or to the President of Parliament, should 
the President of the Senate be unable to serve. Congress may 
by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation or 
inability of all three, declaring what officer shall then act as 
President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the dis-
ability be removed, or the current term end.

Section 2 – Prerogatives of the President of the 
European Union

The  President  shall  represent  the  European  Union  for  the 
purposes of international law. He shall conclude treaties with 
foreign states on behalf of the Union. He shall accredit and 
receive ambassadors and envoys.

(95)  Ratification 

Treaties that regulate the political relations of the European 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18   EuropeanConstitution.eu – The executive branch

The executive branch – EuropeanConstitution.eu   19

(96)  Appointments
(97)  Neil Gorsuch Clause 

(98)  Presidential address 

(99)  Presidential orders 

Union or relate to subjects of federal legislation shall require 
the consent or participation, in the form of a federal law, of 
the  bodies  responsible  in  such  a  case  for  the  enactment  of 
federal  law.  In  the  case  of  executive  agreements,  the  provi-
sions concerning the federal administration shall apply mu-
tatis mutandis.

The President shall appoint, following nomination by Parlia-
ment and consent of the Senate, judges of the Supreme Court, 
and, following nomination by the Prime Minister and consent 
of the Senate, ambassadors, consuls and other diplomatic civ-
il  servants,  and,  upon  termination  of  their  term  or  vacancy 
of their position, and according to their proven expertise, all 
other officers of the European Union, as is required by law 
and not otherwise provided for by this Constitution. No de-
lay shall be admissible for the Senate to provide this advice 
and consent. Congress may by law vest the appointment of 
inferior officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, 
in the Courts of Law, or in the Cabinet of Ministers or part 
thereof. The President may delegate these nomination powers 
to other authorities, as appropriate.

The President shall, from time to time, address Congress, and 
recommend  to  its  consideration  such  measures  as  he  shall 
judge necessary and expedient. He may, on extraordinary oc-
casions, convene both Houses, or either of them.

Orders and directions of the President shall require, for their 
validity, the countersignature of the Prime Minister or of the 
competent Federal Minister. This provision shall not apply to 
the  appointment  or  dismissal  of  the  Prime  Minister  or  to  a 
request to continue managing current affairs.

Section 3 – Establishment of the Prime Minister and 
Cabinet of Ministers

(104)  Age criteria
(105)  Citizenship criteria 

(106)  Service limit 

(107)  Permanent vacancy 

(108)  Executive work 

(109)  End of tenure 

(100)  Federal Cabinet of Ministers 

The Cabinet of Ministers shall consist of the Prime Minister, 
as Head of Government, and of the Federal Ministers.

(110)  Current affairs 

State  lines,  nor  shall  the  Cabinet  of  Ministers  be  composed 
of one Federal Minister per State, with or without the Prime 
Minister and President.

Any person who shall have attained the age of twenty-five in 
the year of the election and have been for five years a citizen 
of the European Union shall be eligible as Prime Minister or 
Federal Minister. Ministers shall not serve more than a com-
bined twelve years.

In case of permanent vacancy of the Office of the Prime Min-
ister,  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  shall  be  appointed  Prime 
Minister until the next parliamentary election.

Section 4 – Prerogatives of the Prime Minister and 
Cabinet of Ministers

The  Prime  Minister  shall  determine  and  be  responsible  for 
the  general  guidelines  of  policy,  with  a  view  to  safeguard-
ing  and  promoting  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms,  pro-
moting  the  public  interest,  and  limiting  inequalities. Within 
these limits and mindful of the exigence of transparency, each 
Federal Minister shall conduct the affairs of his ministry in-
dependently  and  on  his  own  responsibility.  The  Cabinet  of 
Ministers shall resolve differences of opinion between Federal 
Ministers. The Prime Minister shall conduct the proceedings 
of the Cabinet of Ministers in accordance with rules of pro-
cedure adopted by the Cabinet of Ministers and approved by 
the President.

The  tenure  of  Office  of  the  Prime  Minister  or  of  a  Federal 
Minister  shall  end  in  any  event  when  a  new  Parliament  is 
elected; the tenure of office of a Federal Minister shall also 
end on any other occasion on which the Prime Minister ceases 
to hold Office , unless replaced by the Deputy Prime Minister.

At the request of the President, the Prime Minister – or, at the 
request of the Prime Minister or of the President, a Federal 
Minister – shall be obliged to continue to manage the current 
affairs of his Office until a successor is appointed.

(101)  Election by majority 

judgment

(102)  Appointment by President

The Prime Minister shall be elected by majority judgment by 
Parliament  from  its  ranks.  The  person  elected  shall  be  ap-
pointed by the President.

(103)  Choice of Federal Ministers 

Federal  Ministers  shall  be  appointed  and  dismissed  by  the 
President upon the proposal of the Prime Minister. The Prime 
Minister shall appoint one of the Federal Minister as his dep-
uty. The choice of Federal Ministers shall not be made along 

(111)  Commander-in-Chief 

The Prime Minister shall be the Commander-in-Chief of the 
armed forces.

(112)  State of the Union address 

The Prime Minister shall, from time to time and no less than 
once  a  year,  give  Congress  information  on  the  State  of  the 
Union and present the main points of his general policy.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20   EuropeanConstitution.eu – The judiciary

The judiciary – EuropeanConstitution.eu   21

Article IV
The judiciary

(113)  Supreme Court, appeals 
courts and district courts 

(114)  Distribution of district 

courts

(115)  Openness clause 

(116)  Distribution of appeals 

courts

(117)  Openness clause 

Section 1 – Establishment of the Supreme Court 
and inferior courts

The judicial power of the European Union, shall be vested in 
a  judicial  system  comprising  a  Supreme  Court  and  inferior 
courts.  among  which  local  district  courts  and  regional  ap-
peals courts. 

There shall be at least one district court per Member State. 
Judges holding citizenship from the Member State of a given 
district court shall make up between half and two-thirds of 
the court’s judges. 

There shall be at least one Member State in the jurisdiction of 
any appeals court. Judges holding citizenship from the Mem-
ber States of a given appeals court shall make up between half 
and three-fifths of the court’s judges.

(118)  Composition of the 
Supreme Court

The Supreme Court shall have nine judges. Due consideration 
shall be given to the gender diversity of the Supreme Court.

(119)  Independence, good faith
(120)  Age criteria and term limit 

(121)  Judicial powers 

Congress shall establish by law the number, geographical ju-
risdiction and functioning of district and appeals courts for 
the independent, efficient and speedy application of justice. 

The  judges,  both  of  the  Supreme  and  inferior  courts,  shall 
hold their Offices independently and in good faith, and until 
they are eighty years of age or after twenty-five years in Of-
fice, whichever comes first, unless in cases of voluntary depar-
ture, retirement or impeachment.

Section 2 – Powers of the judiciary

The judicial power shall extend to all cases arising under this 
Constitution,  the  laws  of  the  European  Union,  and  treaties 
made, or which shall be made, under its authority; to all cases 
affecting ambassadors, consuls, and other diplomatic repre-

sentatives;  to  all  cases  of  maritime  jurisdiction;  to  military 
matters,  under  a  specific  court-martial  inclusive  of  military 
staff; to controversies to which the European Union shall be a 
party; to controversies between two or more federated States; 
to controversies between a State and citizens of another State, 
between  citizens  of  different  States,  between  citizens  of  the 
same State claiming lands under grants of different States, and 
between a State, or the citizens thereof, and foreign States, or 
citizens thereof.

The  Supreme  Court  shall  have  the  power  to  ascertain  the 
compatibility of a bill or law with the Constitution; no law 
shall be in effect which has been deemed contrary to the Con-
stitution.

In  all  cases  affecting  ambassadors,  consuls,  and  other  dip-
lomatic  representatives,  and  in  cases  in  which  a  State  shall 
be party, the Supreme Court shall have original jurisdiction. 
In  all  the  other  cases  mentioned  above,  the  Supreme  Court 
shall have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with 
such exceptions, and under such regulations as Congress shall 
make.

The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall 
be by jury; and such trial shall be held in the State where the 
said crimes shall have been committed; when not committed 
within any State, the trial shall be at such place or places as 
Congress may by law have directed.

Section 3 – Definition of impeachable offences

The Supreme Court shall, at the earliest possibility, prepare 
for discussion and adoption by Congress specific definitions 
of  the  crimes  of  treason,  corruption,  embezzlement,  wilful 
misappropriation  of  public  funds,  or  other  high  crimes  and 
misdemeanours, that may lead to the impeachment of public 
officials.

Section 4 – Limitations to proceedings

No  person  shall  be  deprived  of  his  civil  rights  or  freedom 
without due process of law; nor be trialled twice for the same 
offence; nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a 
witness against himself; nor have private property be taken 
for public use without fair compensation.

(122)  Judicial review 

(123)  Original and appellate 

jurisdiction 

(124)  Trial by jury 

(125)  Due process
(126)  Double-jeopardy clause
(127)  Miranda rights 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22   EuropeanConstitution.eu – The judiciary

General provisions for citizens, officials, and States – EuropeanConstitution.eu   23

(128)  Fair trial 

(129)  Right to legal 
representation

(130)  Prohibition of torture
(131)  Prohibition of life 
imprisonment
(132)  Prison as places of 
reinsertion

(133)  Anti-Guantanamo clause 

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right 
to a speedy and public trial, done in accordance with the law 
of the State and location wherein the crime shall have been 
committed, and be informed of the nature and cause of the 
accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; 
to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his fa-
vour, and to have the assistance of legal counsel for his de-
fence, provided for him if he be unable to afford it.

In common law cases, no fact tried by a jury shall be other-
wise re-examined in any court of the European Union, unless 
in accordance to the rules of the common law.

Excessive  bail  shall  not  be  required,  nor  excessive  fines  im-
posed,  nor  cruel  punishments  inflicted.  In  accordance  with 
the fundamental rights, torture is explicitly prohibited. Capi-
tal punishment under any form, including through life impris-
onment, is explicitly prohibited; prisons and other places of 
detention shall aim at the reinsertion of inmates into society, 
and be designed and funded as such.

The above provisions shall apply in all judicial proceedings 
and in the entirety of the European Union and in any territory 
where the Union exercises de facto jurisdiction or authority.

Article V
General provisions for citizens, officials, and States

(134)  Ineligibility clause 

(135)  Age limitation 

(136)  Leave for candidacy 

(137)  Campaign duration 

(138)  Campaign funding 

(139)  Campaign finance 
limitations 

Section 1 – Provisions for federal officials and 
elections

No  individual  who  has  been  duly  convicted  of  corruption, 
embezzlement,  wilful  misappropriation  of  public  funds,  or 
crimes to that effect, shall be eligible to run for, or be appoint-
ed  to,  any  federal  Office,  and  the  penalty  for  these  crimes 
shall include removal from Office.

No individual who has already turned seventy-five the year 
before the election or appointment shall be eligible to run for, 
or be appointed to, any federal Office. No discrimination of 
any kind shall further limit access to any Office of the Euro-
pean Union.

Every official candidate for federal elections shall be entitled 
to the leave necessary for his election campaign. No one may 
be prevented from accepting or exercising federal Office. No 
one may be given notice of dismissal or discharged from em-
ployment on the grounds of candidacy or election.

Campaigns shall not last longer than sixty days and shall end 
twenty-four hours before the beginning of the vote. For the 
benefit  of  a  diverse  public  life,  Congress  shall  consider  en-
dowing candidates with equal and limited funding, under fair 
conditions  of  proven  popular  support.  Congress  shall  place 
strict and clear limits on all campaign contributions that can 
be given and received, from physical and moral persons, both 
domestic and foreign; this should cover candidates, their sur-
rogates,  and  groups  supporting  them,  and  include  explicit 
provisions for transparency. These limits to financial contri-
butions shall not be construed as limits to any fundamental 
right, including freedom of expression, but as means to en-
sure the fair participation of all in the democratic process.

The terms of the President, Members of Parliament and Sen-
ators shall end jointly, at noon on a day no later than thirty 
days  following  the  proclamation  of  the  results  of  the  elec-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24   EuropeanConstitution.eu – General provisions for citizens, officials, and States

General provisions for citizens, officials, and States – EuropeanConstitution.eu   25

tions. The terms of their successors shall then begin.

Any election where all candidates are rejected by a majority 
of  the  population  shall  be  considered  null  and  carried  out 
anew with different candidates.

Following the entry into force of this Constitution, the first 
Presidential and Congressional elections shall take place con-
currently.  With  a  view  to  limiting  the  number  of  elections, 
which alter regular political life, States are strongly encour-
aged  to  amend  their  legal  frameworks  and  align  their  elec-
tions with federal ones.

Before they enter on the execution of their Office, the Pres-
ident  of  the  European  Union,  Members  of  the  Cabinet  of 
Ministers, Members of Congress, and judges of the Supreme 
Court shall publicly take the following oath: “I do solemnly 
swear  that  I  will  faithfully  execute  the  duties  of  my  Office, 
and will, to the best of my ability, protect and defend the peo-
ple and the Constitution of the European Union.” All other 
federal officials shall similarly be bound to support the con-
stitutional order.

All elected officials shall receive a fair financial compensation 
for their services, to be clearly laid out by law, and paid out 
of the Treasury of the European Union. With the exception 
of the Federal Cabinet and members of Congress, this com-
pensation shall not be diminished during their term of Office. 
No  elected  official  shall,  during  his  term  of  Office,  receive 
any  other  emolument  from  any  public  entities,  at  all  levels, 
domestic or foreign, nor shall he receive any income or goods 
from  private  sources  in  any  way  related  to  his  attributions. 
Elected officials shall declare all forms of income or interest, 
past, present and promised, and make this declaration public; 
their compatibility with their Office shall be assessed by an 
ethics court of the judiciary, which may require that he severs 
any incompatible ties.

No  elected  official  shall,  over  the  duration  of  his  mandate, 
exercise  any  other  public  Office  under  the  authority  of  the 
European Union or that of any other public administration. 
Nor shall he hold decision-making roles or seat on the board 
of any private entity. Each branch of Government shall ensure 
the full disclosure of all professional and volunteer activities, 
interest and sources of revenue of its elected Officials, as well 
their  criminal  record  when  applicable.  Their  compatibility 
with the Office in question shall be assessed an ethics court 
of the judiciary, which may require that the official severs any 

(140)  Synchronisation of elections 

(141)  Oath 

(142)  Financial compensation 

(143)  Declaration of income 

(144)  Multiple mandates 

(145)  Ethics courts 

(146)  Immunity and limits 

(147)  Accession 

(148)  Secession 

incompatible  ties.  Proven  failure  to  provide  such  disclosure 
shall lead to prohibitive punishment and, when relevant, re-
moval from Office.

The President of the European Union, Members of the Cabi-
net of Ministers, Members of Parliament and Senators shall, 
in all cases except criminal matters, be immune from arrest 
over the duration of their mandate, unless apprehended while 
committing the offence. Both Houses of Congress may choose 
to revoke this immunity for their respective Members. Mind-
ful of the public trust, each House shall delineate the manner 
in which immunity is removed and grounds for such removal.

Section 2 – Acceptance of public documents from 
one State in another

Full faith and credit shall be given in each State to the public 
acts,  records,  and  judicial  proceedings  of  every  other  State. 
Congress  may  by  law  prescribe  the  manner  in  which  such 
acts, records and proceedings shall be proved, and the effect 
thereof.

Section 3 – Rights of citizens in other States and 
deportation of those fleeing justice

The citizens of each State shall be entitled to all rights, priv-
ileges and immunities of citizens of all other Member States.

A person charged in any State with any crime, who shall flee 
from justice and be found in another State, shall, on demand 
of the executive or judicial authorities of the State from which 
he fled, be immediately arrested and delivered to the relevant 
authorities of the State from which he fled, unless where there 
are substantiated reasons to believe that due process will not 
be guaranteed.

Section 4 – Accession and secession

New States fully adhering to the values and principles of the 
European Union may be admitted with equal rights by Con-
gress into the European Union with a two-thirds majority.

New territories may be formed by secession from a State or 
by the junction of two or more States, or parts of States, sub-
ject  to  the  consent  of  the  population  of  the  territories  con-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26   EuropeanConstitution.eu – General provisions for citizens, officials, and States

Final provisions – EuropeanConstitution.eu   27

cerned  by  a  free  and  fair  popular  referendum  with  a  three-
fifths majority. The modalities of secession shall be decided, 
in a timely fashion and without unnecessary impediments, by 
agreement between the legislatures of the territory and of the 
State or States concerned, its fairness approved by Congress, 
and  adopted  before  secession  enters  into  force.  Should  one 
side prevent the timely and peaceful accomplishment of this 
process, Congress reserves itself the right to facilitate the pro-
cedure to the benefit of the other party.

Territories formed by secession or junction may be admitted 
as one or more States by Congress into the European Union 
with  a  three-fifth  majority.  In  cases  where  Congress  refuses 
such admission and secession from the Union is decided, the 
modalities of secession from the European Union shall be de-
cided by agreement between the legislatures of the territory 
and Congress and adopted before secession enters into force.

States  or  territories  may  secede  from  the  European  Union, 
subject  to  the  consent  of  their  population  by  free  and  fair 
popular referendum with a two-thirds majority. The modal-
ities of secession shall be decided by agreement between the 
legislatures  of  the  States  or  territories  concerned  and  Con-
gress and adopted before secession enters into force.

States shall speedily make the necessary arrangements to in-
clude all the above rules in their legal frameworks.

Congress  shall  have  power  to  dispose  of  and  make  all  nec-
essary rules and regulations respecting the territory or other 
property belonging to the European Union, providing these 
respect the fundamental rights and freedoms of those living 
in these territories. Nothing in this Constitution shall be so 
construed as to prejudice any claims of the European Union, 
or of any particular State.

Section 5 – Federal guarantees

The European Union shall actively guarantee to every State 
within it and to their citizens a democratic form of govern-
ment and the respect of their rights. It shall protect each of 
its citizens and residents against invasion and other forms of 
attack, and, upon request from Congress, or from the execu-
tive when Congress cannot be convened at all or in a timely 
fashion, protect them against domestic violence.

(149)  Accession of territories 

(150)  Secession of territories 

(151)  Democratic rule and 

security
(152)  Orbán Clause 

Article VI
Final provisions

(153)  Consideration of 
amendments

(154)  Adoption of amendments 

(155)  Limitations of amendments
(156)  PiS Clause 

Section 1 – Amendments to the Constitution

Congress may consider amendments to this Constitution, but 
not before thirty-six months following its entry into force.

Congress shall adopt amendments to this Constitutions fol-
lowing their approval by a two-thirds majority in both Hous-
es.

Amendments to this Constitution shall be valid and enforcea-
ble when ratified by the legislatures of two thirds of the Mem-
ber States.

No amendment shall in any manner deprive citizens of their 
fundamental  rights  or  freedoms,  curtail  the  democratic  na-
ture of the Union, including the independence of the judiciary, 
or deprive a State of its equality in relation to other States.

(157)  Enforcement of 

amendments

Whenever  necessary,  Congress  shall  have  the  power  to  en-
force these amendments by appropriate legislation.

(158)  Supremacy of federal law 

Section 2 – Continuity and supremacy of the 
Constitution

All debts contracted and engagements entered into, before the 
adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the Eu-
ropean Union under this Constitution, as under the previous 
Union.

This Constitution, and the laws of the European Union which 
shall be made in pursuance thereof, all treaties made, or which 
shall be made, under the authority of the European Union, as 
well as all relevant norms, standards, regulations, and orders, 
unless otherwise states, shall be the supreme law of the land, 
superseding State and local law. Judges in every State shall be 
bound thereby, regardless of any indication to the contrary in 
the Constitution, laws or regulations of any State.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28   EuropeanConstitution.eu – Final provisions

(159)  Entry into force 

Section 3 – Entry into force

The ratification by the legislatures of three fifths of the States 
of  the  European  Union  shall  be  sufficient  for  the  establish-
ment  and  entry  into  force  of  this  Constitution  between  the 
ratifying States.

First published in February 2018 at:

https://europeanconstitution.eu/the-european-constitution

Last updated in September 2020 (version 19)

For more information on EuropeanConstitution.eu and our Constitution, please visit our website:

www.europeanconstitution.eu

© EuropeanConstitution.eu, 2020. All rights reserved.
Reproduction is authorised for non-commercial use, provided the source is acknowledged.
For all commercial purposes, seek prior permission in writing from EuropeanConstitution.eu.
EuropeanConstitution.eu is registered in France as a non-profit organisation. RNA number: W162002250.

 
 
W W W . E U R O P E A N C O N S T I T U T I O N . E U

